README.md, before:

<div align = center>

# [ArduinoUtils](https://github.com/ArminJo/Arduino-Utils)
My utility collection for Arduino

[![Badge License: GPLv3](https://img.shields.io/badge/License-GPLv3-brightgreen.svg)](https://www.gnu.org/licenses/gpl-3.0)
 &nbsp; &nbsp;
[![Badge Version](https://img.shields.io/github/v/release/ArminJo/Arduino-Utils?include_prereleases&color=yellow&logo=DocuSign&logoColor=white)](https://github.com/ArminJo/Arduino-Utils/releases/latest)
 &nbsp; &nbsp;
[![Badge Commits since latest](https://img.shields.io/github/commits-since/ArminJo/Arduino-Utils/latest?color=yellow)](https://github.com/ArminJo/Arduino-Utils/commits/master)
 &nbsp; &nbsp;
[![Badge Build Status](https://github.com/ArminJo/Arduino-Utils/workflows/LibraryBuild/badge.svg)](https://github.com/ArminJo/Arduino-Utils/actions)
 &nbsp; &nbsp;
![Badge Hit Counter](https://visitor-badge.laobi.icu/badge?page_id=ArminJo_Arduino-Utils)
<br/>
<br/>
[![Stand With Ukraine](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/vshymanskyy/StandWithUkraine/main/badges/StandWithUkraine.svg)](https://stand-with-ukraine.pp.ua)

Not yet available as Arduino library.

[![Button Install](https://img.shields.io/badge/Install-brightgreen?logoColor=white&logo=GitBook)](https://www.ardu-badge.com/Arduino-Utils)
 &nbsp; &nbsp;
[![Button API](https://img.shields.io/badge/API-yellow?logoColor=white&logo=OpenStreetMap)](https://arminjo.github.io/Arduino-Utils/classArduino-Utils.html)
 &nbsp; &nbsp;
[![Button Changelog](https://img.shields.io/badge/Changelog-blue?logoColor=white&logo=AzureArtifacts)](https://github.com/ArminJo/Arduino-Utils?tab=readme-ov-file#revision-history)

</div>

#### If you find this library useful, please give it a star.

&#x1F30E; [Google Translate](https://translate.google.com/translate?sl=en&u=https://github.com/ArminJo/Arduino-Utils)

<br/>

# Table of content
* [SimpleEMAFilters](https://github.com/ArminJo/Arduino-Utils?tab=readme-ov-file#simpleemafilters)
* [ADCUtils](https://github.com/ArminJo/Arduino-Utils?tab=readme-ov-file#adcutils)
* [HCSR04](https://github.com/ArminJo/Arduino-Utils?tab=readme-ov-file#hcsr04)
* [MeasureVoltageAndResistance](https://github.com/ArminJo/Arduino-Utils?tab=readme-ov-file#measurevoltageandresistance)
* [BlinkLed](https://github.com/ArminJo/Arduino-Utils?tab=readme-ov-file#blinkled)
* [ShowInfo](https://github.com/ArminJo/Arduino-Utils?tab=readme-ov-file#showinfo)
* [HexDump](https://github.com/ArminJo/Arduino-Utils?tab=readme-ov-file#hexdump)
* [AVRUtils](https://github.com/ArminJo/Arduino-Utils?tab=readme-ov-file#avrutils)
* [MillisUtils](https://github.com/ArminJo/Arduino-Utils?tab=readme-ov-file#millisutils)
* [DebugLevel](https://github.com/ArminJo/Arduino-Utils?tab=readme-ov-file#debuglevel)
* [ATtinyUtils](https://github.com/ArminJo/Arduino-Utils?tab=readme-ov-file#attinyutils)
* [AvrTracing](https://github.com/ArminJo/Arduino-Utils?tab=readme-ov-file#avrtracing)
* [Utilities available as separate Arduino library](https://github.com/ArminJo/Arduino-Utils?tab=readme-ov-file#utilities-available-as-separate-arduino-library)
  * [ATtinySerialOut](https://github.com/ArminJo/Arduino-Utils?tab=readme-ov-file#attinyserialout)
  * [EasyButtonAtInt01](https://github.com/ArminJo/Arduino-Utils?tab=readme-ov-file#easybuttonatint01)
  * [The very useful digitalWriteFast.h file based on the version from Watterott electronic.](https://github.com/ArminJo/Arduino-Utils?tab=readme-ov-file#the-very-useful-digitalwritefasth-file-based-on-the-version-from-watterott-electronic)
* [Revision History](https://github.com/ArminJo/Arduino-Utils?tab=readme-ov-file#revision-history)
* [CI](https://github.com/ArminJo/Arduino-Utils?tab=readme-ov-file#ci)

# SimpleEMAFilters
An EMA (**Exponential Moving Average**) filter behaves like an RC lowpass filter with RC = SamplePeriod((1-alpha)/alpha) see [here](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Low-pass_filter#Simple_infinite_impulse_response_filter).<br/>
An EMA filter is implemented by e.g. the following statement:

```c++
int16_t sLowpass3;
int16_t Lowpass5;
...
sLowpass3 += ((aInputValue - sLowpass3) + (1 << 2)) >> 3; // 1.8 us, alpha = 0.125, cutoff frequency 22.7 Hz @1kHz
sLowpass5 += ((aInputValue - sLowpass5) + (1 << 4)) >> 5; // 2.5 us, alpha = 1/32 0.03125, cutoff frequency 5.13 Hz @1kHz
```
which takes **2.5 &micro;s on a 16 MHz Arduino Uno**.

The alpha's for the implemented **ultra fast EMA filters** are 1/2, 1/4, 1/8, 1/16, 1/32 and 1/256 corresponding to the shift values of 1, 2, 3, 4, 5 and 8.

### For a 1 kHz sampling rate (1/1000s sampling interval) we get the following equivalent cutoff (-3db) frequencies:
Simplified formula for small alpha is CutoffFrequency = (SampleFrequency / (2&pi; * ((1/alpha) - 1));
- For alpha 1/2 (shift 1) -> (160 Hz / 1)  With 1 = (1/alpha) - 1
- 1/4 (shift 2) -> 53 Hz (160 Hz / 3)  With 3 = (1/alpha) - 1
- 1/8 -> 22.7 Hz (160 Hz / 7)
- 1/16 -> 10.6 Hz (160 Hz / 15)
- 1/32 -> 5.13 Hz (160 Hz / 31)
- 1/256 -> 0.624 Hz (160 Hz / 255)

Using the [more exact formula](https://github.com/MakeMagazinDE/DigitaleFilter/blob/main/Filter-Berechnungen.xlsx), alpha = 1 - e ^ -((2&pi; * CutoffFrequency) / SampleFrequency)  
=> CutoffFrequency = (-ln(1-alpha) * SampleFrequency) / 2&pi; we get the values:
- 110 Hz
- 46 Hz
- 21.2 Hz
- 10.3 Hz
- 5.05 Hz

The **maximum output value for integer filters** is: InputValue - ((1 << (ShiftValue -1)) -1), i.e **85 for InputValue 100 and ShiftValue 5** (Lowpass5).

### The [SimpleEMAFilters.hpp](https://github.com/ArminJo/Arduino-Utils/blob/master/src/SimpleEMAFilters.hpp#L66) contains:
- A set of **ultrafast** EMA (Exponential Moving Average) filters which require only **1 to 2 microseconds**.
- 3 highpass and bandpass filters, generated by just subtracting one lowpass from input (highpass) or from another lowpass (bandpass).
- 16 and 32 bit Biquad filters.
- Display routines for Arduino Plotter.

All implemented filters are applied at once to the input test signal calling `doFiltersStep(int16_t aInput)` and the results can in turn easily be displayed in the Arduino Plotter.

### Plotter outputs representing e.g. a 42, 21, 10.5, 5.2 Hz square / sine wave at a sample rate of 1 ms (or 84, 42 ... Hz at a sample rate of 0.5 ms and so on)

Arduino Plotter output for a rectangle input signal with a amplitude of +/- 100. E.g. LowP3 is the Lowpass with alpha 1/8 implemented by `>> 3` and the cutoff frequency of 21 Hz.
![ArduinoPlotter output SignificantFilters](pictures/SignificantFilters.png)

Note the following facts:
- Highpass is always Input - Lowpass.
- Therefore highpass -here HighP3_16- can have an overshoot of 100%.
- The output of DoubleLowpass3 and 4 is more and more resembling a delayed sine.
- The output of LowP5_32 and DoubleLowP4_16 have almost the same amplitude but DoubleLowP4_16 is way more resembling a (delayed) sine.
- The output of TripleLowP3_16 has a higher amplitude than DoubleLowP4_16 with both looking quite like a (delayed) sine.

<br/>

Arduino Plotter output for a rectangle input signal with very low amplitude of +/- 20 where you see clipping effects due to the limited resolution of the used 16 bit math.
![ArduinoPlotter output LowPass_LowInput](pictures/LowPass_LowInput.png)
The Lowpass3_int32 and Lowpass5_int32 are 32 bit fixed point implementations for higher resolution which requires **4.2 &micro;s instead of the 1.8 / 2.5 &micro;s of 16 bit**.
<br/>

Arduino Plotter output for a sine input signal with a amplitude of +/- 100.
![ArduinoPlotter output for LowPass with sine input](pictures/SignificantFilters_Sine.png)
Note the **different attenuations** at different frequencies.
<br/><br/>

Arduino Plotter output for a triangle input signal with a amplitude of +/- 100.
![ArduinoPlotter output triangle input](pictures/SignificantFilters_Triangle.png)
Note that higher order filters and low pass with high shifts are almost a perfect sine.

Arduino Plotter output for a sawtooth input signal with a amplitude of +/- 100.
![ArduinoPlotter output for sawtooth input](pictures/SignificantFilters_Sawtooth.png)

Arduino Plotter output for a random input signal with a amplitude of +/- 100.
![ArduinoPlotter output for lowpass on random input](pictures/LowPass1_3_5_8_Random.png)

<br/>

### Arduino Plotter output for a rectangle input signal with 4 different frequencies 42 Hz > 21 Hz > 10.5 Hz > 5.2 Hz
Click on the pictures to enlarge them.

| All lowpass filters. | Highpass filters.<br/>Generated by subtracting lowpass from input. |
| :-: | :-: |
| ![AllLowPass](pictures/AllLowPass.png) | ![HighPassFilters](pictures/HighPassFilters.png) |
| Bandpass and reject filters.<br/>Bandpass is generated by subtracting one lowpass from onother with different shift value.<br/>Reject filter is input minus bandpass.| High order Lowpass. |
| ![BandPassAndReject](pictures/BandPassAndReject.png) | ![HighOrderLowPass](pictures/HighOrderLowPass.png) |
| LowPass1, 3, 5 and 8.<br/>Lowpass8 behave like a integrator here, resulting in a triangle output. | LowPass3, 5 and 8.<br/>Comparison of different implementations with 16 bit integer, 32 bit integer and 32 bit float. |
| ![LowPass1_3_5_8](pictures/LowPass1_3_5_8.png) | ![LowPass16And32Bit](pictures/LowPass16And32Bit.png) |
| BiQuad filters with damping factor = 0.<br/>You see the overshoot. |  |
| ![BiQuadFilters](pictures/BiQuadFilters.png) |  |


The floating point implementation of the 1/32 EMA filter takes **24 to 34 &micro;s**.<br/>
There are convenience functions implemented for EMA filter, but normally it is better to implement it inline by e.g.

```c++
int16_t Lowpass3;
int16_t Lowpass5;
int32_t Lowpass5_int32;
..
Lowpass3 += ((InputValue - Lowpass3) + (1 << 2)) >> 3; // 1.8 us, alpha = 0.125, cutoff frequency 22.7 Hz @1kHz
Lowpass5 += ((InputValue - Lowpass5) + (1 << 4)) >> 5; // 2.5 us, alpha = 1/32 0.03125, cutoff frequency 5.13 Hz @1kHz
Lowpass5_int32 += ((((int32_t) InputValue) << 8) - Lowpass5_int32) >> 5; // Fixed point 4.2 us, value is Lowpass5_int32 >> 8
Lowpass8_int32 += ((((int32_t) InputValue) << 16) - Lowpass8_int32) >> 8; // Fixed point 2.0 us because of fast shift, value is Lowpass8_int32 >> 16
```

**!Attention!** The 16 bit implementations are limited to a **maximum input value of +/- 16383** for rectangular input (which is the worst input case). The reason is, that the term `InputValue - Lowpass3` must always fit into a 16 bit signed integer.

### Related Links
- https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Moving_average#Exponential_moving_average
- https://www.dsprelated.com/blogimages/RickLyons/Exponential_Averaging_FIGURE2.gif
- https://www.norwegiancreations.com/2015/10/tutorial-potentiometers-with-arduino-and-filtering/
- https://www.norwegiancreations.com/2016/08/double-exponential-moving-average-filter-speeding-up-the-ema/
- https://www.norwegiancreations.com/2016/03/arduino-tutorial-simple-high-pass-band-pass-and-band-stop-filtering/
- https://arduinokickstompdrum.wordpress.com/2021/05/14/simple-filtering/
- https://github.com/popcornell/Arduino-Multiplierless-EMA-filter
- https://github.com/MakeMagazinDE/DigitaleFilter

# ADCUtils
Fast and flexible ADC conversions. **Intelligent handling of delays for reference and channel switching**.
- Functions for easy **oversampling**.
- Function for easy getting the maximum value of measurements.
- Functions for getting **temperature and VCC voltage**.  For VCC, resolution is 20 millivolt!
- Functions to check if voltage is too low for a given period, used especially for Li-ion batteries supply.

# HCSR04
- Blocking and **non-blocking** reading of HCSR04 US Sensors with timeouts and exact conversions.
- Supports also **1 Pin mode** available with the HY-SRF05 or Parallax PING modules.

### You can modify the HCSR04 modules to 1 Pin mode:
1. Old module with 3 16 pin chips:<br/>
   Connect Trigger and Echo direct or use a resistor < 4.7 k&ohm;.
   If you remove both 10 k&ohm; pullup resistor you can use a connecting resistor < 47 k&ohm;, but I suggest to use 10 k&ohm; which is more reliable.
2. Old module with 3 16 pin chips but with no pullup resistors near the connector row:<br/>
   Connect Trigger and Echo with a resistor > 200 &ohm;. Use 10 k&ohm;.
3. New module with 1 16 pin and 2 8 pin chips:<br/>
   Connect Trigger and Echo by a resistor > 200 &ohm; and < 22 k&ohm;.
4. All modules:<br/>
   Connect Trigger and Echo by a resistor of 4.7 k&ohm;.

# MeasureVoltageAndResistance
Measures voltage and resistance with **1 mV and 2 &ohm; resolution** at the lower end.<br/>
First voltage is measured. If voltage is zero, then the unknown resistance to ground is measured using the 5 volt (VCC) supply with internal/series resistance of 10 k&ohm; or 100 k&ohm;.

### Fritzing board
![Fritzing board](extras/VoltAndOhmmeter_Steckplatine.png)
### Fritzing schematics
![Fritzing schematics](extras/VoltAndOhmmeter_Schaltplan.png)

# BlinkLed
- Class for blinking one ore more LED's in different fashions.

# ShowInfo
- Serial.print display of timer and other peripheral and system registers (to be extended :-)).

# HexDump
- Creates hex memory and stack dumps on serial output.

void printBufferHex(uint8_t *aBufferAddress, uint16_t aNumberOfBytesToPrint);     // Prints no address and hex bytes without ASCII representation.
void printBufferHexDump(uint8_t *aBufferAddress, uint16_t aNumberOfBytesToPrint); // Prints short relative address and hex bytes without ASCII representation.
void printBufferHexAndASCIIDump(uint8_t *aBufferAddress, uint16_t aNumberOfBytesToPrint); // Prints short relative address and hex bytes without ASCII representation.
void printMemoryHexNoASCIIDump(uint8_t *aMemoryAddress, uint16_t aNumberOfBytesToPrint);  // Prints 16 bit address and hex bytes with ASCII representation.
void printMemoryHexAndASCIIDump(uint8_t *aMemoryAddress, uint16_t aNumberOfBytesToPrint); // Prints 16 bit address and hex bytes with ASCII representation.
void printStackMemory(uint16_t aNumberOfBytesToPrint); // Prints 16 bit address and hex bytes ending at top of stack / RAM end.
void printStackDump(); // Prints 16 bit address and hex bytes starting at current stackpointer and ending at ending at top of stack / RAM end.

```
0x0000:  0xFF 0x81 0x82 0x00 0x08 0x02 0x00 0x27 0xFF 0xFF 0x0E 0xB3 0x81 0xFC 0x9B 0x47   .. .. '  .....G
0x0010:  0x00 0x00 0x00 0x00 0x20 0x65 0x00 0x0F 0xBE 0xEB 0x9B 0x98 0x2C 0xF1 0x08 0x2C       e .....,..,
0x0020:  0x55 0x55 0x55 0x55 0x55 0x55 0x55 0x55 0x55 0x55 0x55 0x55 0x55 0x55 0x55 0x55  UUUUUUUUUUUUUUUU
```

# AVRUtils
- Sleep and delay/sleep with watchdog functions.
- Computation and display of available Ram, Heap / Stack memory.
- Display of watchdog reset reason in AVRUtilsDemo, which currently (3/2024) only works with [optiboot 8.1 bootloader](https://github.com/ArminJo/Arduino-Utils/tree/main/Optiboot_8_1).

RAM starts of variables initialized with values != 0, followed by variables initialized with 0 and variables not initialized by using attribute `__attribute__((section(".noinit")))`. It ends with the heap and the stack.

#### Sample output if stack runs into data
```
Size of Data + BSS, Heap start, Stack end=2041
Stack used 20 of 7
Currently available Heap=0
```
# Optiboot 8.1
The [optiboot 8.1 bootloader](https://github.com/ArminJo/Arduino-Utils/tree/main/Optiboot_8_1) is required to determine the (watchdog) reset reason e.g. used in AVRUtilsDemo..

# MillisUtils
Unifies millis() timer handling for Digispark, AttinyCore and Arduino cores.
- Start, stop and modify milliseconds timer and value.
- Functions to compensate `millis()` after long running tasks in `noIterrupt()` context like NeoPixel output, ADC buffer reading etc.
- Blocking delayMilliseconds() function for use in noInterrupts context like ISR.

# DebugLevel.h
- Propagating debug levels for development. Supports level `TRACE, DEBUG, INFO, WARN and ERROR`.
- **Includes an explanation of semantics of these levels**.

# ATtinyUtils
- `toneWithTimer1PWM()`.
- `noToneWithTimer1PWM()`.
- `isBODSFlagExistent()` -> checking for ATtiny85 revision C.
- fuse reading function.
- `changeDigisparkClock()` to use Digispark boards with no Digispark core like e.g. ATTinyCore by [Spence Konde](https://github.com/SpenceKonde/ATTinyCore).
It changes Digispark Bootloader clock settings to get the right CPU frequency and resets Digispark OCCAL tweak.
Consider to use new [optimized Digispark core](https://github.com/ArminJo/DigistumpArduino) instead.

# AvrTracing
**Tracing an Arduino program** by printing each program counter value after executing one instruction.

# Utilities available as separate Arduino library

## [ATtinySerialOut](https://github.com/ArminJo/ATtinySerialOut/src)
Minimal bit-bang send serial
- 115200 baud for 1/8/16 MHz ATtiny clock.
The utility for serial output for ATtinies is contained in the [ATtinySerialOut library](https://github.com/ArminJo/ATtinySerialOut)
available as an Arduino library.

## [EasyButtonAtInt01](https://github.com/ArminJo/EasyButtonAtInt01/src)
- Arduino library for handling push buttons just connected between ground and INT0 and / or INT1 pin.
- No external pullup, **no polling needed**.
The utility for easy button handling for ATmegas or ATtinies is contained in the [EasyButtonAtInt01 library](https://github.com/ArminJo/EasyButtonAtInt01)
available as an Arduino library.

## The very useful *[digitalWriteFast.h file](https://github.com/ArminJo/Arduino-Utils/blob/master/src/digitalWriteFast.h)* based on the version from [Watterott electronic](https://github.com/watterott/Arduino-Libs).

### Changing include (*.h) files with Arduino IDE
First, use *Sketch > Show Sketch Folder (Ctrl+K)*.<br/>
If you have not yet saved the example as your own sketch, then you are instantly in the right library folder.<br/>
Otherwise you have to navigate to the parallel `libraries` folder and select the library you want to access.<br/>
In both cases the library source and include files are located in the libraries `src` directory.<br/>
The modification must be renewed for each new library version!

### Modifying compile options with Sloeber IDE
If you are using [Sloeber](https://eclipse.baeyens.it) as your IDE, you can easily define global symbols with *Properties > Arduino > CompileOptions*.<br/>
![Sloeber settings](https://github.com/ArminJo/ServoEasing/blob/master/pictures/SloeberDefineSymbols.png)

# Revision History

### Version 1.2.0
- Updated AVRUtils, ADCUtils, HexDump and ShowInfo.
- Added Optiboot 8.1.

### Version 1.1.0
- SimpleEMAFilters: Added "State Variable" / Biquad and double and triple Lowpass filters.
- ADCUtils: Renamed `*VoltageCheck*()` to `*VCCCheck*()`, `setADCMultiplexerAndReferenceForNextConversion()` to `setADCChannelAndReferenceForNextConversion()` and changed signature of `readUntil4ConsecutiveValuesAreEqual()`.
- Renamed getTemperature* to getCPUTemperature*.
- Miscellaneous renamings and improvements.
- Added `float` to LongUnion.
- Added `printRAMInfo()` in AVRUtils.
- Fixed bug in HexDump.
- Documentation.

### Version 1.0.0
- Added unions.
- Changed distance return value for overflow to 0.
- Miscellaneous improvements.

### Version 0.8.0
- Initial version

# CI
The library examples are tested with GitHub Actions for the following boards:

- Arduino Uno
- Arduino Leonardo
- Digispark (using ATTiny85 @1MHz)
- Generic ATTiny85 @1MHz

Commit message:

Bumped version to 1.2.1 - Improved Stack info, if stack is exhausted, added flush to HexDump, improved examples.

README.md, after:

<div align = center>

# [ArduinoUtils](https://github.com/ArminJo/Arduino-Utils)
My utility collection for Arduino<br/>
Contains utilities for fast and flexible ADC conversions, Voltage and Resitance measurement, RAM, heap and stack info, Hex dumps, EMA filters etc.

[![Badge License: GPLv3](https://img.shields.io/badge/License-GPLv3-brightgreen.svg)](https://www.gnu.org/licenses/gpl-3.0)
 &nbsp; &nbsp;
[![Badge Version](https://img.shields.io/github/v/release/ArminJo/Arduino-Utils?include_prereleases&color=yellow&logo=DocuSign&logoColor=white)](https://github.com/ArminJo/Arduino-Utils/releases/latest)
 &nbsp; &nbsp;
[![Badge Commits since latest](https://img.shields.io/github/commits-since/ArminJo/Arduino-Utils/latest?color=yellow)](https://github.com/ArminJo/Arduino-Utils/commits/master)
 &nbsp; &nbsp;
[![Badge Build Status](https://github.com/ArminJo/Arduino-Utils/workflows/LibraryBuild/badge.svg)](https://github.com/ArminJo/Arduino-Utils/actions)
 &nbsp; &nbsp;
![Badge Hit Counter](https://visitor-badge.laobi.icu/badge?page_id=ArminJo_Arduino-Utils)
<br/>
<br/>
[![Stand With Ukraine](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/vshymanskyy/StandWithUkraine/main/badges/StandWithUkraine.svg)](https://stand-with-ukraine.pp.ua)

Not yet available as Arduino library.

[![Button Install](https://img.shields.io/badge/Install-brightgreen?logoColor=white&logo=GitBook)](https://www.ardu-badge.com/Arduino-Utils)
 &nbsp; &nbsp;
[![Button API](https://img.shields.io/badge/API-yellow?logoColor=white&logo=OpenStreetMap)](https://arminjo.github.io/Arduino-Utils/classArduino-Utils.html)
 &nbsp; &nbsp;
[![Button Changelog](https://img.shields.io/badge/Changelog-blue?logoColor=white&logo=AzureArtifacts)](https://github.com/ArminJo/Arduino-Utils?tab=readme-ov-file#revision-history)

</div>

#### If you find this library useful, please give it a star.

&#x1F30E; [Google Translate](https://translate.google.com/translate?sl=en&u=https://github.com/ArminJo/Arduino-Utils)

<br/>

# Table of content
* [SimpleEMAFilters](https://github.com/ArminJo/Arduino-Utils?tab=readme-ov-file#simpleemafilters)
* [ADCUtils](https://github.com/ArminJo/Arduino-Utils?tab=readme-ov-file#adcutils)
* [HCSR04](https://github.com/ArminJo/Arduino-Utils?tab=readme-ov-file#hcsr04)
* [MeasureVoltageAndResistance](https://github.com/ArminJo/Arduino-Utils?tab=readme-ov-file#measurevoltageandresistance)
* [BlinkLed](https://github.com/ArminJo/Arduino-Utils?tab=readme-ov-file#blinkled)
* [ShowInfo](https://github.com/ArminJo/Arduino-Utils?tab=readme-ov-file#showinfo)
* [HexDump](https://github.com/ArminJo/Arduino-Utils?tab=readme-ov-file#hexdump)
* [AVRUtils](https://github.com/ArminJo/Arduino-Utils?tab=readme-ov-file#avrutils)
* [MillisUtils](https://github.com/ArminJo/Arduino-Utils?tab=readme-ov-file#millisutils)
* [DebugLevel](https://github.com/ArminJo/Arduino-Utils?tab=readme-ov-file#debuglevel)
* [ATtinyUtils](https://github.com/ArminJo/Arduino-Utils?tab=readme-ov-file#attinyutils)
* [AvrTracing](https://github.com/ArminJo/Arduino-Utils?tab=readme-ov-file#avrtracing)
* [Utilities available as separate Arduino library](https://github.com/ArminJo/Arduino-Utils?tab=readme-ov-file#utilities-available-as-separate-arduino-library)
  * [ATtinySerialOut](https://github.com/ArminJo/Arduino-Utils?tab=readme-ov-file#attinyserialout)
  * [EasyButtonAtInt01](https://github.com/ArminJo/Arduino-Utils?tab=readme-ov-file#easybuttonatint01)
  * [The very useful digitalWriteFast.h file based on the version from Watterott electronic.](https://github.com/ArminJo/Arduino-Utils?tab=readme-ov-file#the-very-useful-digitalwritefasth-file-based-on-the-version-from-watterott-electronic)
* [Revision History](https://github.com/ArminJo/Arduino-Utils?tab=readme-ov-file#revision-history)
* [CI](https://github.com/ArminJo/Arduino-Utils?tab=readme-ov-file#ci)

# SimpleEMAFilters
An EMA (**Exponential Moving Average**) filter behaves like an RC lowpass filter with RC = SamplePeriod((1-alpha)/alpha) see [here](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Low-pass_filter#Simple_infinite_impulse_response_filter).<br/>
An EMA filter is implemented by e.g. the following statement:

```c++
int16_t sLowpass3;
int16_t Lowpass5;
...
sLowpass3 += ((aInputValue - sLowpass3) + (1 << 2)) >> 3; // 1.8 us, alpha = 0.125, cutoff frequency 22.7 Hz @1kHz
sLowpass5 += ((aInputValue - sLowpass5) + (1 << 4)) >> 5; // 2.5 us, alpha = 1/32 0.03125, cutoff frequency 5.13 Hz @1kHz
```
which takes **2.5 &micro;s on a 16 MHz Arduino Uno**.

The alpha's for the implemented **ultra fast EMA filters** are 1/2, 1/4, 1/8, 1/16, 1/32 and 1/256 corresponding to the shift values of 1, 2, 3, 4, 5 and 8.

### For a 1 kHz sampling rate (1/1000s sampling interval) we get the following equivalent cutoff (-3db) frequencies:
Simplified formula for small alpha is CutoffFrequency = (SampleFrequency / (2&pi; * ((1/alpha) - 1));
- For alpha 1/2 (shift 1) -> (160 Hz / 1)  With 1 = (1/alpha) - 1
- 1/4 (shift 2) -> 53 Hz (160 Hz / 3)  With 3 = (1/alpha) - 1
- 1/8 -> 22.7 Hz (160 Hz / 7)
- 1/16 -> 10.6 Hz (160 Hz / 15)
- 1/32 -> 5.13 Hz (160 Hz / 31)
- 1/256 -> 0.624 Hz (160 Hz / 255)

Using the [more exact formula](https://github.com/MakeMagazinDE/DigitaleFilter/blob/main/Filter-Berechnungen.xlsx), alpha = 1 - e ^ -((2&pi; * CutoffFrequency) / SampleFrequency)  
=> CutoffFrequency = (-ln(1-alpha) * SampleFrequency) / 2&pi; we get the values:
- 110 Hz
- 46 Hz
- 21.2 Hz
- 10.3 Hz
- 5.05 Hz

The **maximum output value for integer filters** is: InputValue - ((1 << (ShiftValue -1)) -1), i.e **85 for InputValue 100 and ShiftValue 5** (Lowpass5).

### The [SimpleEMAFilters.hpp](https://github.com/ArminJo/Arduino-Utils/blob/master/src/SimpleEMAFilters.hpp#L66) contains:
- A set of **ultrafast** EMA (Exponential Moving Average) filters which require only **1 to 2 microseconds**.
- 3 highpass and bandpass filters, generated by just subtracting one lowpass from input (highpass) or from another lowpass (bandpass).
- 16 and 32 bit Biquad filters.
- Display routines for Arduino Plotter.

All implemented filters are applied at once to the input test signal calling `doFiltersStep(int16_t aInput)` and the results can in turn easily be displayed in the Arduino Plotter.

### Plotter outputs representing e.g. a 42, 21, 10.5, 5.2 Hz square / sine wave at a sample rate of 1 ms (or 84, 42 ... Hz at a sample rate of 0.5 ms and so on)

Arduino Plotter output for a rectangle input signal with a amplitude of +/- 100. E.g. LowP3 is the Lowpass with alpha 1/8 implemented by `>> 3` and the cutoff frequency of 21 Hz.
![ArduinoPlotter output SignificantFilters](pictures/SignificantFilters.png)

Note the following facts:
- Highpass is always Input - Lowpass.
- Therefore highpass -here HighP3_16- can have an overshoot of 100%.
- The output of DoubleLowpass3 and 4 is more and more resembling a delayed sine.
- The output of LowP5_32 and DoubleLowP4_16 have almost the same amplitude but DoubleLowP4_16 is way more resembling a (delayed) sine.
- The output of TripleLowP3_16 has a higher amplitude than DoubleLowP4_16 with both looking quite like a (delayed) sine.

<br/>

Arduino Plotter output for a rectangle input signal with very low amplitude of +/- 20 where you see clipping effects due to the limited resolution of the used 16 bit math.
![ArduinoPlotter output LowPass_LowInput](pictures/LowPass_LowInput.png)
The Lowpass3_int32 and Lowpass5_int32 are 32 bit fixed point implementations for higher resolution which requires **4.2 &micro;s instead of the 1.8 / 2.5 &micro;s of 16 bit**.
<br/>

Arduino Plotter output for a sine input signal with a amplitude of +/- 100.
![ArduinoPlotter output for LowPass with sine input](pictures/SignificantFilters_Sine.png)
Note the **different attenuations** at different frequencies.
<br/><br/>

Arduino Plotter output for a triangle input signal with a amplitude of +/- 100.
![ArduinoPlotter output triangle input](pictures/SignificantFilters_Triangle.png)
Note that higher order filters and low pass with high shifts are almost a perfect sine.

Arduino Plotter output for a sawtooth input signal with a amplitude of +/- 100.
![ArduinoPlotter output for sawtooth input](pictures/SignificantFilters_Sawtooth.png)

Arduino Plotter output for a random input signal with a amplitude of +/- 100.
![ArduinoPlotter output for lowpass on random input](pictures/LowPass1_3_5_8_Random.png)

<br/>

### Arduino Plotter output for a rectangle input signal with 4 different frequencies 42 Hz > 21 Hz > 10.5 Hz > 5.2 Hz
Click on the pictures to enlarge them.

| All lowpass filters. | Highpass filters.<br/>Generated by subtracting lowpass from input. |
| :-: | :-: |
| ![AllLowPass](pictures/AllLowPass.png) | ![HighPassFilters](pictures/HighPassFilters.png) |
| Bandpass and reject filters.<br/>Bandpass is generated by subtracting one lowpass from onother with different shift value.<br/>Reject filter is input minus bandpass.| High order Lowpass. |
| ![BandPassAndReject](pictures/BandPassAndReject.png) | ![HighOrderLowPass](pictures/HighOrderLowPass.png) |
| LowPass1, 3, 5 and 8.<br/>Lowpass8 behave like a integrator here, resulting in a triangle output. | LowPass3, 5 and 8.<br/>Comparison of different implementations with 16 bit integer, 32 bit integer and 32 bit float. |
| ![LowPass1_3_5_8](pictures/LowPass1_3_5_8.png) | ![LowPass16And32Bit](pictures/LowPass16And32Bit.png) |
| BiQuad filters with damping factor = 0.<br/>You see the overshoot. |  |
| ![BiQuadFilters](pictures/BiQuadFilters.png) |  |


The floating point implementation of the 1/32 EMA filter takes **24 to 34 &micro;s**.<br/>
There are convenience functions implemented for EMA filter, but normally it is better to implement it inline by e.g.

```c++
int16_t Lowpass3;
int16_t Lowpass5;
int32_t Lowpass5_int32;
..
Lowpass3 += ((InputValue - Lowpass3) + (1 << 2)) >> 3; // 1.8 us, alpha = 0.125, cutoff frequency 22.7 Hz @1kHz
Lowpass5 += ((InputValue - Lowpass5) + (1 << 4)) >> 5; // 2.5 us, alpha = 1/32 0.03125, cutoff frequency 5.13 Hz @1kHz
Lowpass5_int32 += ((((int32_t) InputValue) << 8) - Lowpass5_int32) >> 5; // Fixed point 4.2 us, value is Lowpass5_int32 >> 8
Lowpass8_int32 += ((((int32_t) InputValue) << 16) - Lowpass8_int32) >> 8; // Fixed point 2.0 us because of fast shift, value is Lowpass8_int32 >> 16
```

**!Attention!** The 16 bit implementations are limited to a **maximum input value of +/- 16383** for rectangular input (which is the worst input case). The reason is, that the term `InputValue - Lowpass3` must always fit into a 16 bit signed integer.

### Related Links
- https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Moving_average#Exponential_moving_average
- https://www.dsprelated.com/blogimages/RickLyons/Exponential_Averaging_FIGURE2.gif
- https://www.norwegiancreations.com/2015/10/tutorial-potentiometers-with-arduino-and-filtering/
- https://www.norwegiancreations.com/2016/08/double-exponential-moving-average-filter-speeding-up-the-ema/
- https://www.norwegiancreations.com/2016/03/arduino-tutorial-simple-high-pass-band-pass-and-band-stop-filtering/
- https://arduinokickstompdrum.wordpress.com/2021/05/14/simple-filtering/
- https://github.com/popcornell/Arduino-Multiplierless-EMA-filter
- https://github.com/MakeMagazinDE/DigitaleFilter

# ADCUtils
Fast and flexible ADC conversions. **Intelligent handling of delays for reference and channel switching**.
- Functions for easy **oversampling**.
- Function for easy getting the maximum value of measurements.
- Functions for getting **temperature and VCC voltage**.  For VCC, resolution is 20 millivolt!
- Functions to check if voltage is too low for a given period, used especially for Li-ion batteries supply.

# HCSR04
- Blocking and **non-blocking** reading of HCSR04 US Sensors with timeouts and exact conversions.
- Supports also **1 Pin mode** available with the HY-SRF05 or Parallax PING modules.

### You can modify the HCSR04 modules to 1 Pin mode:
1. Old module with 3 16 pin chips:<br/>
   Connect Trigger and Echo direct or use a resistor < 4.7 k&ohm;.
   If you remove both 10 k&ohm; pullup resistor you can use a connecting resistor < 47 k&ohm;, but I suggest to use 10 k&ohm; which is more reliable.
2. Old module with 3 16 pin chips but with no pullup resistors near the connector row:<br/>
   Connect Trigger and Echo with a resistor > 200 &ohm;. Use 10 k&ohm;.
3. New module with 1 16 pin and 2 8 pin chips:<br/>
   Connect Trigger and Echo by a resistor > 200 &ohm; and < 22 k&ohm;.
4. All modules:<br/>
   Connect Trigger and Echo by a resistor of 4.7 k&ohm;.

# MeasureVoltageAndResistance
Measures voltage and resistance with **1 mV and 2 &ohm; resolution** at the lower end.<br/>
First voltage is measured. If voltage is zero, then the unknown resistance to ground is measured using the 5 volt (VCC) supply with internal/series resistance of 10 k&ohm; or 100 k&ohm;.

### Fritzing board
![Fritzing board](extras/VoltAndOhmmeter_Steckplatine.png)
### Fritzing schematics
![Fritzing schematics](extras/VoltAndOhmmeter_Schaltplan.png)

# BlinkLed
- Class for blinking one ore more LED's in different fashions.

# ShowInfo
- Serial.print display of timer and other peripheral and system registers (to be extended :-)).

# HexDump
- Creates hex memory and stack dumps on serial output.

void printBufferHex(uint8_t *aBufferAddress, uint16_t aNumberOfBytesToPrint);     // Prints no address and hex bytes without ASCII representation.
void printBufferHexDump(uint8_t *aBufferAddress, uint16_t aNumberOfBytesToPrint); // Prints short relative address and hex bytes without ASCII representation.
void printBufferHexAndASCIIDump(uint8_t *aBufferAddress, uint16_t aNumberOfBytesToPrint); // Prints short relative address and hex bytes without ASCII representation.
void printMemoryHexNoASCIIDump(uint8_t *aMemoryAddress, uint16_t aNumberOfBytesToPrint);  // Prints 16 bit address and hex bytes with ASCII representation.
void printMemoryHexAndASCIIDump(uint8_t *aMemoryAddress, uint16_t aNumberOfBytesToPrint); // Prints 16 bit address and hex bytes with ASCII representation.
void printStackMemory(uint16_t aNumberOfBytesToPrint); // Prints 16 bit address and hex bytes ending at top of stack / RAM end.
void printStackDump(); // Prints 16 bit address and hex bytes starting at current stackpointer and ending at ending at top of stack / RAM end.

```
0x0000:  0xFF 0x81 0x82 0x00 0x08 0x02 0x00 0x27 0xFF 0xFF 0x0E 0xB3 0x81 0xFC 0x9B 0x47   .. .. '  .....G
0x0010:  0x00 0x00 0x00 0x00 0x20 0x65 0x00 0x0F 0xBE 0xEB 0x9B 0x98 0x2C 0xF1 0x08 0x2C       e .....,..,
0x0020:  0x55 0x55 0x55 0x55 0x55 0x55 0x55 0x55 0x55 0x55 0x55 0x55 0x55 0x55 0x55 0x55  UUUUUUUUUUUUUUUU
```

# AVRUtils
- Sleep and delay/sleep with watchdog functions.
- Computation and display of available Ram, Heap / Stack memory.
- Display of watchdog reset reason in AVRUtilsDemo, which currently (3/2024) only works with [optiboot 8.1 bootloader](https://github.com/ArminJo/Arduino-Utils/tree/main/Optiboot_8_1).

RAM starts of variables initialized with values != 0, followed by variables initialized with 0 and variables not initialized by using attribute `__attribute__((section(".noinit")))`. It ends with the heap and the stack.

#### Sample output if stack runs into data
```
Size of Data + BSS, Heap start, Stack end=2041
Stack used 20 of 7
Currently available Heap=0
```
# Optiboot 8.1
The [optiboot 8.1 bootloader](https://github.com/ArminJo/Arduino-Utils/tree/main/Optiboot_8_1) is required to determine the (watchdog) reset reason e.g. used in AVRUtilsDemo..

# MillisUtils
Unifies millis() timer handling for Digispark, AttinyCore and Arduino cores.
- Start, stop and modify milliseconds timer and value.
- Functions to compensate `millis()` after long running tasks in `noIterrupt()` context like NeoPixel output, ADC buffer reading etc.
- Blocking delayMilliseconds() function for use in noInterrupts context like ISR.

# DebugLevel.h
- Propagating debug levels for development. Supports level `TRACE, DEBUG, INFO, WARN and ERROR`.
- **Includes an explanation of semantics of these levels**.

# ATtinyUtils
- `toneWithTimer1PWM()`.
- `noToneWithTimer1PWM()`.
- `isBODSFlagExistent()` -> checking for ATtiny85 revision C.
- fuse reading function.
- `changeDigisparkClock()` to use Digispark boards with no Digispark core like e.g. ATTinyCore by [Spence Konde](https://github.com/SpenceKonde/ATTinyCore).
It changes Digispark Bootloader clock settings to get the right CPU frequency and resets Digispark OCCAL tweak.
Consider to use new [optimized Digispark core](https://github.com/ArminJo/DigistumpArduino) instead.

# AvrTracing
**Tracing an Arduino program** by printing each program counter value after executing one instruction.

# Utilities available as separate Arduino library

## [ATtinySerialOut](https://github.com/ArminJo/ATtinySerialOut/src)
Minimal bit-bang send serial
- 115200 baud for 1/8/16 MHz ATtiny clock.
The utility for serial output for ATtinies is contained in the [ATtinySerialOut library](https://github.com/ArminJo/ATtinySerialOut)
available as an Arduino library.

## [EasyButtonAtInt01](https://github.com/ArminJo/EasyButtonAtInt01/src)
- Arduino library for handling push buttons just connected between ground and INT0 and / or INT1 pin.
- No external pullup, **no polling needed**.
The utility for easy button handling for ATmegas or ATtinies is contained in the [EasyButtonAtInt01 library](https://github.com/ArminJo/EasyButtonAtInt01)
available as an Arduino library.

## The very useful *[digitalWriteFast.h file](https://github.com/ArminJo/Arduino-Utils/blob/master/src/digitalWriteFast.h)* based on the version from [Watterott electronic](https://github.com/watterott/Arduino-Libs).

### Changing include (*.h) files with Arduino IDE
First, use *Sketch > Show Sketch Folder (Ctrl+K)*.<br/>
If you have not yet saved the example as your own sketch, then you are instantly in the right library folder.<br/>
Otherwise you have to navigate to the parallel `libraries` folder and select the library you want to access.<br/>
In both cases the library source and include files are located in the libraries `src` directory.<br/>
The modification must be renewed for each new library version!

### Modifying compile options with Sloeber IDE
If you are using [Sloeber](https://eclipse.baeyens.it) as your IDE, you can easily define global symbols with *Properties > Arduino > CompileOptions*.<br/>
![Sloeber settings](https://github.com/ArminJo/ServoEasing/blob/master/pictures/SloeberDefineSymbols.png)

# Revision History

### Version 1.2.1
- Improved Stack info, if stack is exhausted, added flush to HexDump, improved examples.

### Version 1.2.0
- Updated AVRUtils, ADCUtils, HexDump and ShowInfo.
- Added Optiboot 8.1.

### Version 1.1.0
- SimpleEMAFilters: Added "State Variable" / Biquad and double and triple Lowpass filters.
- ADCUtils: Renamed `*VoltageCheck*()` to `*VCCCheck*()`, `setADCMultiplexerAndReferenceForNextConversion()` to `setADCChannelAndReferenceForNextConversion()` and changed signature of `readUntil4ConsecutiveValuesAreEqual()`.
- Renamed getTemperature* to getCPUTemperature*.
- Miscellaneous renamings and improvements.
- Added `float` to LongUnion.
- Added `printRAMInfo()` in AVRUtils.
- Fixed bug in HexDump.
- Documentation.

### Version 1.0.0
- Added unions.
- Changed distance return value for overflow to 0.
- Miscellaneous improvements.

### Version 0.8.0
- Initial version

# CI
The library examples are tested with GitHub Actions for the following boards:

- Arduino Uno
- Arduino Leonardo
- Digispark (using ATTiny85 @1MHz)
- Generic ATTiny85 @1MHz
